Title: VisualPRM: An Effective Process Reward Model for Multimodal Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/html/2503.10291

Published Time: Fri, 14 Mar 2025 00:51:57 GMT

Markdown Content:
Weiyun Wang 1,2, Zhangwei Gao 3,2, Lianjie Chen 4,2, Zhe Chen 5,2, Jinguo Zhu 2,
Xiangyu Zhao 3,2, Yangzhou Liu 5,2, Yue Cao 5,2, Shenglong Ye 2, Xizhou Zhu 4,2,
Lewei Lu 7, Haodong Duan 2, Yu Qiao 2, Jifeng Dai 4,2, Wenhai Wang 6,2

###### Abstract

We introduce VisualPRM, an advanced multimodal Process Reward Model (PRM) with 8B parameters, which improves the reasoning abilities of existing Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) across different model scales and families with Best-of-N (BoN) evaluation strategies. Specifically, our model improves the reasoning performance of three types of MLLMs and four different model scales. Even when applied to the highly capable InternVL2.5-78B, it achieves a 5.9-point improvement across seven multimodal reasoning benchmarks. Experimental results show that our model exhibits superior performance compared to Outcome Reward Models and Self-Consistency during BoN evaluation. To facilitate the training of multimodal PRMs, we construct a multimodal process supervision dataset VisualPRM400K using an automated data pipeline. For the evaluation of multimodal PRMs, we propose VisualProcessBench, a benchmark with human-annotated step-wise correctness labels, to measure the abilities of PRMs to detect erroneous steps in multimodal reasoning tasks. We hope that our work can inspire more future research and contribute to the development of MLLMs.

1 Introduction
--------------

With the remarkable success of Large Language Models (LLMs) in natural language processing, Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have also achieved significant advancements across various vision-language tasks. Despite their strong performance in perception and recognition, a large gap remains in reasoning capabilities between open-source and proprietary models. A series of studies have explored methods to enhance reasoning abilities, focusing on the perspectives of data collection and construction, offline preference optimization, and online reinforcement learning. Additionally, another line of research investigates utilizing Test-Time Scaling (TTS) to enhance the reasoning abilities of LLMs. This approach requires the policy model to generate multiple response candidates and select the best one, based on the quality estimation of a critic model, thereby improving the response quality at the cost of higher inference time. However, TTS for MLLMs remains largely unexplored.

This work investigates the application of TTS for MLLMs, focusing on the Best-of-N evaluation strategies. The challenges of adapting TTS for MLLMs involves lack of effective critic models and lack of evaluation benchmarks for multimodal critic models. To solve these challenges, we first introduce VisualPRM400K, a dataset comprising approximately 400K multimodal process supervision data. Each sample includes an image, a question, a step-by-step solution, and correctness annotations for each step. We then introduce VisualProcessBench, a benchmark for evaluating PRMs and MLLMs in detecting erroneous steps in multimodal reasoning tasks. This benchmark includes 2,866 samples with 26,950 human-annotated step-wise correctness labels.

Building upon the dataset and benchmark, we develop VisualPRM, an advanced multimodal Process Reward Model (PRM) with 8B parameters, to serve as the critic model in BoN evaluation. Each training sample is formulated as a multi-turn chat. The first turn includes the image, the question, and the first solution step, while each subsequent turn presents a new step. The model is trained to predict the correctness of the given step at each turn. Experimental results demonstrate that VisualPRM enhances MLLM reasoning across different model families and scales. Specifically, VisualPRM improves the overall reasoning performance of MiniCPM-V2.6, QwenVL2.5-7B, InternVL2.5-8B, and InternVL2.5-78B by 8.0, 3.7, 8.4, and 5.9 points, respectively, across seven multimodal reasoning benchmarks.

2 Related Work
--------------

Multimodal Large Language Models. A wide range of efforts has been made to advance the development of MLLMs, including improvements in model architecture, data construction, and training algorithms. Despite these advancements, existing works primarily focus on the training process of MLLMs, leaving Test-Time Scaling for MLLMs largely underexplored. In this work, we investigate TTS applications for MLLMs, specifically focusing on the Best-of-N evaluation to improve multimodal reasoning performance.
